How Do You Measure Innovation Output and Impact?
Measuring innovation is tough — as this depends on the viewpoint — the perspective and the actual definition of innovation.

George Krasadakis
60 Leaders
George Krasadakis
·
Follow
Published in
60 Leaders
·
11 min read
·
Nov 14, 2023
12

1



A good measurement framework should quantify both outputs and outcomes in the appropriate time frame. In this context, we ask our leaders to name the top three innovation KPIs that reflect the ‘health’ of a corporate innovation system/ program and to describe ways to make them actionable — to steer the innovation process depending on the levels of these KPIs.
Read great insights from François Candelon, Alf Rehn, Mathew (Mat) Hughes, Davide Matteo Falasconi.
Excerpt from 60 Leaders on Innovation (2021)
François Candelon
Managing Director and Senior Partner, BCG — Global Director, BCG Henderson Institute
In measuring innovation, we generally observe three levels of maturity.
- First level — focus on output of innovation. Around 70% of firms get stuck on this first level of maturity — they focus on the output of innovation. There is little transparency of the performance of their innovations in the market and no clear metrics to measure the outcome, such as in terms of percentage of sales or the net promoter score.
- Second Level — focus on output of innovation, yet measure it incredibly well. This is about 20% of the firms. As a result of steering based on output, these organizations tend to optimize for predictable output, and thus, they often produce a stream of highly incremental, safe-bet innovations.
- Third Level — focus on the outcome of innovation. Only around 10% of companies reach this level of maturity and measure the outcome.
Often, we observe that engineering-driven, industrial goods businesses are stuck at maturity level two. They lack the ability to perform non-incremental innovation that involves risky bets, cross-business-unit plays, and non-core innovation that has spill-over effects.
Only about 10% of organizations manage to optimize innovation activities for their outcomes. - François Candelon
Arriving at the third level of maturity, 10% of organizations manage to optimize innovation activities for their outcomes. Their success requires that they have separate processes in place to manage breakthrough projects, as well as different metrics that focus on throughput and learning, not output.
One industry-leading retailer takes this insight to a near-flawless level of execution through a system of mirrored central and regional teams, in which team member roles are matched on a one-to-one basis. This ensures direct exchange and accountability, as well as clear channels of feedback to the central team on local customer needs. To avoid local bottlenecks, the company tracks product managers’ performance centrally, starting from product development and continuing through rollout. To address a common obstacle to effective scaling, it established a central launch support team to share insights and discoveries from multiple regions and to make experienced backup resources available as needed.
A firm’s health can be assessed by looking at an array of indicators, the first of which is its share of non-consensus bets. This can be measured through an internal voting market. Next, the balance between false positive and false negative decisions gives an idea of a firm’s current state. Such an indicator requires a post-mortem analysis of decisions and projects, which few firms do. One firm that successfully implemented post-mortem analysis is Amazon. An innovation funnel with stage-gate processes to select ideas provides another indicator for the health of an innovation system of a firm. The shape of the funnel provides insight into the vitals of the firm. Finally, several validation tests can be run across projects to assess the health of innovation activity. Such tests measure how fast the organization is learning and validates that speed with a simple risk-burn down methodology. It specifies open questions and risks and assigns hypotheses to test against.
But even for the most mature firms that measure outcomes — not simply the output of innovation — there are still challenges in measuring innovation: feedback cycles between measured outcomes and the actions preceding it are long and organizations tend to mistake metrics and KPIs for the actual work. If one could overcome these obstacles, innovation would be more effective. Gamification may be one interesting lever to solve problems. For gamification to be effective, it would need to introduce more frequent and playful measurement that directly links desired behavior to rewards. Successful serial innovators are made, not born.
François Candelon joined Boston Consulting Group in 1993. He has worked in several European countries, led BCG’s global telecommunications work from 2008 to 2012, and spent seven years in China where he worked with the most advanced tech companies.
Alf Rehn
Professor of innovation, design, and management — University of Southern Denmark
I find this question exceptionally important, but not as important as the way it is usually posited — including here. Ever since we started to talk about innovation as a specific output of human ingenuity, we’ve been obsessed with measuring the same. Yet we’ve never fully succeeded, owing to the intractable complexity of innovation. We might measure patents, and miss all the things that cannot be patented (not to mention overcounting — seeing as the real correlation patents/lawyers, not patents/innovation). We might measure profits, and miss out on the profits we might have made with another innovation trajectory. We may clumsily count new products, and remain blind to how the industry/environment might be shifting under our feet. Not to mention the fact that many of the most important issues of innovation, such as impact and human progress, simply may lack clear-cut metrics.
It isn’t enough to measure post hoc, we need to think about what goes into the process. - Professor Alf Rehn
For me, however, the problem of innovation metrics is a small one compared to the true failure of contemporary innovation discourse, namely the fact that we’re continuously ignoring inputs. We live in an age where the innovation inputs have never been greater. Looking just at financial expenditures, I’ve taken the OECD figures and estimated that the global spend on innovation is at a minimum 3000 billion dollars — and I could easily argue for a much higher sum. This should be compounded with the fact that we’ve never had more people working on innovation, never more books and other materials on innovation, never more innovation consultants around, not to mention that most of the people working in advanced economies walk around carrying a minimum of one supercomputer with access to more information than any previous generation in their trouser-pocket. Put in this context, the actual innovation outputs of our global society are far from impressive. Instead, they are rather pitiful. Thus, the real issue to be solved is not to find some kind of perfect innovation metric, but rather to solve the more complex dilemma of ROII — Return On Innovation Investment. Such a measure would not just look at output in a simplistic way, but ask whether there is a meaningful and productive connection between effort and resources used and output and impact received. This might seem a somewhat limited way to portray the issue, but I would contend it can actually solve some of the dilemmas of innovation.
Each singular innovation instance is but a single pearl in a very long necklace. - Professor Alf Rehn
A meaningful measure of ROII would, by the very nature of innovation, have to accept that mere financial or quantitative measures are not in and of themselves enough. Investments in innovation have to also reflect an impact beyond the financial one, as the inputs are far greater than monetary. Taking into account the complexities of inputs, including the fact that many of these have long histories and are embedded into social wholes, would require from us a more complex understanding of outputs as well. More to the point, understanding that any innovation engagement is part of a long chain of inputs, might make us see that merely presenting a short-term business case is fundamentally anti-innovation. Instead, an innovation output needs to have a social impact and also be a foundation for upcoming engagements to build on.
What I am trying to say here is that we need far more robust ways of talking about innovation and metrics. It isn’t enough to measure post hoc, we need to think about what goes into the process. Further, it isn’t enough to only measure at one point in time. Instead, we need to think of how each singular innovation instance is but a single pearl in a very long necklace — and that we need to both pay heed to what came before and what might come after.
Professor Alf Rehn is a thought leader in innovation and creativity, as well as an author, strategic advisor, and speaker. His latest book is Innovation for the Fatigued, and he can be found at alfrehn.com or on social media as @alfrehn
Mathew (Mat) Hughes
Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation — Loughborough University
Measuring innovation output and its impact matters a great deal. Ultimately, senior managers must demonstrate to shareholders and investors that their innovation strategy works. So fundamentally their KPIs are built around shareholder wealth and investor reward (by that share price, dividend payments, and measures therein such as ROI[1], ROE[2], and Tobin’s q[3]). However, these KPIs are meaningless to other employees.
For an employee, the strongest signals come from what is measured and rewarded. - Mathew (Mat) Hughes
What matters to employees further down the organization is where their work is rewarded. So for senior managers, for their innovation strategy to succeed, they must incentivize behaviors that coordinate with the intended innovation strategy, reward those behaviors and outputs (there is an important difference here), and ensure that outcomes and their impact align with innovation strategy.
On the surface this seems deceptively simple: implement a performance reward system and get the desired performance. Unfortunately, this is not so. First, what is measured and what is rewarded sends signals to employees about what their priorities should be. Managers may have simple or elaborate innovation strategies. But employees further down the organization experience a phenomenon called ‘hierarchical erosion’: the greater their distance from senior managers, the lower their understanding and recall of strategy, and organizational goals and objectives. For the daily work and life of the employee then, the strongest signals come from what is measured and what is rewarded.
For example, in the following chart, the measures on the left reward cost control, which at best steers the employee to incrementally innovate. But even then, a far simpler solution is to not undertake such expenditure and simply come in under budget. They are then rewarded, irrespective of any innovation. The measures in the right-hand column steer more towards at least some form of innovation activity, encouraging this behavior from employees and rewarding them accordingly.

Innovation strategy again matters. If the firm seeks breakthroughs to fundamentally change its historical performance frontier, it must drive an exploration-focused innovation strategy. In turn, heavy (or exclusive) financial control or short-term-focused measures are incompatible with such a strategy. To reemphasize, an exploration-focused strategy cannot succeed when employees are incentivized to act in ways that mitigate such a strategy. There must be some tolerance of failure by senior managers and an acceptance that not all innovations will succeed. While managers can vocally claim such a position, to the employee any such claim is moot if it is not reflected in the measurement, management, and rewarding of performance.
There is no magic template of performance measures and rewards that will ensure innovation output. But based on what I have discussed so far, there are general rules that should be considered:
- Do not control for one thing but reward based on another. The reward criteria always take priority.
- Loosen the rigidity of a control system by reducing reliance on tock-boxes that eliminate employee responsibility for innovation.
- Decentralize control and some reward schemes by co-opting middle-managers to deliver on innovation strategy.
- Measures and rewards must be transparent and align with innovation strategy (otherwise the strategy loses its authenticity, and the reward criteria will always take precedence).
- Mix financial and strategic.
- Beware of over-relying on or over-emphasizing financial control (use it strategically, e.g., innovate costs out of the business).
- Acknowledge and celebrate your goals.
Mathew (Mat) Hughes is a Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation at the School of Business and Economics, Loughborough University. Professor Hughes is also the Co-founder and Co-director of the Centre for Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation. He previously held appointments as Reader in Entrepreneurial Management at Durham University, and Lecturer then Associate Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation at the University of Nottingham.
Davide Matteo Falasconi
Chief Innovation Officer — Italian Ministry of Technological Innovation and Digital Transition
I think that innovation, to be considered so, must be something that has brought a significant improvement — on life, economical system, etc. — and thus it is of critical importance to be able to measure its impact. While invention output can be measured in terms of scientific papers produced, patents, and new prototypes, the measurement of innovation comes with significant, but not insurmountable, challenges — and this is due to its complex activities and relationships[4].
I believe that innovation can be seen as the product of three complementary but independent variables: invention, experimentation, and commercialization. Experimentation refers to the capability that allows companies to define, prototype, and test new solutions — possibly combining new or existing services and products. Commercialization refers to the ability to foster adoption and scale-up solutions in the market. These three variables are all relevant and important: even a small or marginal invention, when massively scaled, can bring an impressive innovation. To be a little bit provocative, you could take the example of Apple’s iPod and argue that it was not a relevant invention. When compared to USB Pendrive for listening to music, the latter could provide complete usability and even more cross-device portability. However, Apple iPod was a dramatic innovation if we consider its diffusion, how it reinvented the user experience, and the novelty of associating a sort of sensorial feeling when listening to music.
From a company’s perspective, managing and measuring innovation output should start with a portfolio view and then cover some traditional components, such as R&D and sales from new or innovative products. A couple of these indicators are the ratio of R&D spend and sales from new products (focus on efficiency) and the ratio of gross margin from new/innovative products to sales (focus on the effectiveness on bottom-line)[5],[6].
To make such KPIs actionable, the best technique is to evaluate them vs rolling averages over defined periods and within the same industry. They could also work well across industries — the important choice to be made is about the innovation timeline or the R&D cycle to evaluate the rolling average — which is typically easier when the comparison is performed with the same industry.
Innovation can be seen as the product of three variables: invention, experimentation, and commercialization. - Davide Falasconi
Furthermore, when moving from a companys’ view to a single initiative or a limited cluster of initiatives to assess, the difficulties of measuring innovation become even harder. The main reason is that just a few initiatives out of the innovation funnel typically produce tangible impact and the results cannot be guaranteed ex-ante. Basically, you must search for single events subject to low probability (depending on the phase that is under analysis). While post-mortem analysis can be useful, it would not cover the ongoing process of monitoring, directing, and deciding on innovation initiatives. Although counterintuitive, I believe that some approaches from Risk Management could be leveraged — those related to the assessment and intervention of very rare but extremely severe events. This approach, applied in innovation management, would use certain KPIs to monitor and get a sort of reverse “early warning system/signal”, that would return a “star” flag instead of a “red” one.
Davide Falasconi has a wide international career in strategic transformations, innovation, and digitization, being a manager, advisor, and start-up investor. He worked at Pirelli, McKinsey, and recently in the Public Sector. Davide holds MSc and BSc in Engineering and MBA at LBS.

